Add anthos-2 blog (#35)
kartverket/skip.kartverket.no: blog/2023-11-20-anthos-2.md

1. Upgrade your admin workstation to the target version of your upgrade.

2. From your admin workstation, upgrade your user clusters.

3. After all of the user clusters have been upgraded, you can upgrade your admin cluster from the admin workstation.

We have tried using [Terraform](https://www.terraform.io/) for as much of the configuration and configuration control as possible. This can not be done in the same way for clusters using the kubeception model. When we migrate to Controlplane V2 however, clusters can be managed via GCP, and we can finally start using terraform for our on-premise cluster config in the same way as for our GKE clusters, and GCP configuration in general.

## GCP integration

When working with an on-premise Anthos cluster, some of the nice-to-have features of a standard GKE cluster have been lost. However, now Anthos on VMware cluster have gradually received more and more features compared to GKE clusters. 

### IAM and Groups

> Since we have been early adaptors of Anthos, we had to endure not being able to delegate clusterroles to IAM groups, and had to add single users to clusterrole-/rolebindings in kubernetes. This was not a huge problem for us, since we were working with a very limited number of teams and devs, but it was apparent that this was not going to scale well. Luckily we got support for groups before it was a problem, and our config files went from containing way too many names and email addresses, to only containing groups.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since we are early adaptors of Anthos, we had to endure not being able to delegate clusterroles to IAM groups, and had to add single users to clusterrole-/rolebindings in kubernetes. This was not a huge problem for us, since we were working with a very limited number of teams and devs, but it was apparent that this was not going to scale well. Luckily we got support for groups before it was a problem, and our config files went from containing way too many names and email addresses, to only containing groups.
```
We still are among the early adoptees ;)

team, it is our job to make sure that deployment is as quick and convenient as
possible for the product teams. This ambition has led us to iterate on our
processes, which has finally led us to a solution that both we and the
developers enjoy using.

### Iteration 1 - Terraform

When we first started out with Anthos, we had a very manual process for
deploying applications. A service account was provisioned in GCP, which allowed
the developers to impersonate a service account in Kubernetes, which in turn
allowed them to deploy apps using Terraform. This approach worked, but had a
decent amount of rough edges, and also would fail in ways that was hard to
debug.

With this approach the developers would have to manage their own Terraform
files, which most of the time was not within their area of expertise. And while
SKIP was able to build modules and tools to make this easier, it was still a
complex system that was hard to understand. Observability and discoverability
was also an issue.

Because of this we would consistently get feedback that this way of deploying
was too complicated and slow, in addition handling Terraform state was a pain.

> As a platform team we're commited to our teams' well being, so we took this

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As a platform team we're committed to our teams' well being, so we took this
```

seriously and looked at alternatives. It was around this time we adopted Anthos,
so thus Anthos Config Managment was a natural choice.

### Iteration 2 - Anthos Config Managment (ACM)

![Anthos Config Management architecture showing multiple Git repos deployed to a cluster](img/acm-1.png)

ACM is a set of tools that allows you to declaratively manage your Kubernetes
resources. Here we're mostly going to talk about Config Sync, which is a
[GitOps](https://about.gitlab.com/topics/gitops/) system for Kubernetes.

In a GitOps system, a team will have a Git repository that contains all the
Kubernetes resources that they want to deploy. This repository is then synced
to the Kubernetes cluster, and the resources are applied.

This can be likened to a pull-based system, where the GitOps tool (Config sync)
watches the repo for changes and pulls them into the cluster. This is in
contrast to a push-based system, where a script pushes the changes to a
cluster. It is therefore a dedicated system for deployment to Kubernetes, and
following the [UNIX philosophy](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Unix_philosophy)
which focuses on doing that one thing well.

> Using this kind of a workflow solves a lot of the issues around the terraform

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using this type of a workflow solves a lot of the issues around the Terraform
```
"kind of" is informal...

based deployment that we had in the previous iteration. No longer do developers
need to set up a complicated integration with GCP service accounts and

> impersonation, commiting a file to a Git repo will trigger a deployment. The

Reviewer: ```suggestion
impersonation, committing a file to a Git repo will trigger a deployment. The
```

Git repo and the manifests in them also works as a state of truth for the
cluster, instead of having to reverse engineer what was deployed based on
terraform diffs and state.

![ACM UI showing a sync in progress](img/acm-2.gif)

It started well, however we soon ran into issues. The system would often take
a long time to reconcile the sync, and during the sync we would not have any
visibility into what was happening. This was not a deal breaker, but at the

> same time this was not a particularily good developer experience.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
same time this was not a particularly good developer experience.
```

We also ran into issues with implementing a level of self-service that we were
satisfied with. We wanted to give the developers the ability to provision their
own namespaces, but due to the multi-tenant nature of our clusters we also had
to make sure that teams were not able to write to each others' namespaces.
This was not a feature we were able to implement, but luckily our next iteration
had this built in, and we'll get back to that.

The final nail was the user interface. We simply expected more from a deployment
system than what ACM was able to provide. The only view into the deployment was
a long list of resources, which to a developer that is not an expert in
Kubernetes was not intuitive enough.

### Final iteration - Argo CD

![](img/argo-1.png)

This finally brought us to our current iteration. We had heard about Argo CD
before, but initially we were hesitant to add another system to our stack.
After ACM had introduced us to GitOps and we looked deeper into Argo CD, it was
obvious to us that Argo was more mature and would give our developers a better
user experience.

> The killer feature here is the UI. Argo CD has an intuitive and user friendly

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The killer feature here is the UI. Argo CD has an intuitive and user-friendly
```
https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/user-friendly

which we'll talk about next.

### Grafana with the LGTM stack

![Grafana dashboard with a Kubernetes cluster overview](img/grafana-1.png)

When we realized that our needs were not entirely met by Google Cloud Monitoring,
we started a project to develop a monitoring stack that would meet our needs.
Since Grafana is open source and has a large community, we decided to use that
as our frontend. Our backend is the LGTM stack, which is a set of open source
tools that are designed to work well together for ingesting, storing and querying
logs, traces and metrics.

What we noticed immediately was that the product teams were much more engaged
with this stack than they were with Google Cloud Monitoring. Previously they
would not really look at the dashboards, but now they are using them and even
creating their own. This is a huge win for us, as we want the teams to be
engaged with the monitoring and observability of their services.

There was a discussion about what the backend should be, if we should use
Grafana Cloud or host it ourselves. There would be a lot of benefits of using
the cloud, as we would not have to maintain the stack or worry about performance

> or storage. There was, however, a concern about cost and wether or not log files

Reviewer: ```suggestion
or storage. There was, however, a concern about cost and whether or not log files
```

When accessing the cluster via the Connect gateway there are some limits. The Connect gateway does not handle persistent connections, and this makes it impossible to do [exec, port-forward, proxy or attach](https://cloud.google.com/anthos/multicluster-management/gateway/using#run_commands_against_the_cluster) . This is not a problem for a production environment, where containers should never be used in this way. But for a dev, or sandbox environment, this is a bit of a pain-point.

### Service Mesh
A [Service Mesh](https://istio.io/latest/about/service-mesh/) in Kubernetes is an infrastructure layer that manages communication between services. We are using Anthos Service Mesh (ASM), this is based on [Istio](https://istio.io) and nicely integrated with the gcp console. It is easy to get an overview of services, the connection between them, and what services are connected to either our internal or external gateways. This can be displayed in a Topology view, or if you click a service, you get a more detailed list.

![Anthos Service Mesh](img/services.png)
A snippet of services running in our sandbox cluster.

> When we deploy services to our cluster we create almost all kubernetes and service-mesh resources with [Skiperator](https://github.com/kartverket/skiperator). This operator configures the resources to fit our setup, and makes "best practice" the easy way. This has been one of the great success stories in SKIP, and Skiperator is in continuos development.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When we deploy services to our cluster we create almost all kubernetes and service-mesh resources with [Skiperator](https://github.com/kartverket/skiperator). This operator configures the resources to fit our setup, and applies "best practice" the easy way. This has been one of the great success stories in SKIP, and Skiperator is in continuous development.
```

possible for the product teams. This ambition has led us to iterate on our
processes, which has finally led us to a solution that both we and the
developers enjoy using.

### Iteration 1 - Terraform

When we first started out with Anthos, we had a very manual process for
deploying applications. A service account was provisioned in GCP, which allowed
the developers to impersonate a service account in Kubernetes, which in turn
allowed them to deploy apps using Terraform. This approach worked, but had a
decent amount of rough edges, and also would fail in ways that was hard to
debug.

With this approach the developers would have to manage their own Terraform
files, which most of the time was not within their area of expertise. And while
SKIP was able to build modules and tools to make this easier, it was still a
complex system that was hard to understand. Observability and discoverability
was also an issue.

Because of this we would consistently get feedback that this way of deploying
was too complicated and slow, in addition handling Terraform state was a pain.
As a platform team we're commited to our teams' well being, so we took this

> seriously and looked at alternatives. It was around this time we adopted Anthos,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
seriously and looked at alternatives. It was around the time we adopted Anthos,
```

cluster, instead of having to reverse engineer what was deployed based on
terraform diffs and state.

![ACM UI showing a sync in progress](img/acm-2.gif)

It started well, however we soon ran into issues. The system would often take
a long time to reconcile the sync, and during the sync we would not have any
visibility into what was happening. This was not a deal breaker, but at the
same time this was not a particularily good developer experience.

We also ran into issues with implementing a level of self-service that we were
satisfied with. We wanted to give the developers the ability to provision their
own namespaces, but due to the multi-tenant nature of our clusters we also had
to make sure that teams were not able to write to each others' namespaces.
This was not a feature we were able to implement, but luckily our next iteration
had this built in, and we'll get back to that.

The final nail was the user interface. We simply expected more from a deployment
system than what ACM was able to provide. The only view into the deployment was
a long list of resources, which to a developer that is not an expert in

> Kubernetes was not intuitive enough.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Kubernetes, was not intuitive enough.
```

work in cloud as they are not labeled as such. This is not a big issue, but it's
a bit annoying. The bigger issue is that all the dashboards feel sluggish and
slow to load. Several of us have used Grafana before, so we're used to a
snappy and responsive UI. In our opinion, Google Cloud Monitoring feels clunky
in comparison.

So the cost and the user experience were the main reasons we decided to look at
alternatives to Google Cloud Monitoring. We ended up using Grafana and LGTM,
which we'll talk about next.

### Grafana with the LGTM stack

![Grafana dashboard with a Kubernetes cluster overview](img/grafana-1.png)

When we realized that our needs were not entirely met by Google Cloud Monitoring,
we started a project to develop a monitoring stack that would meet our needs.
Since Grafana is open source and has a large community, we decided to use that
as our frontend. Our backend is the LGTM stack, which is a set of open source
tools that are designed to work well together for ingesting, storing and querying
logs, traces and metrics.

What we noticed immediately was that the product teams were much more engaged
with this stack than they were with [Google Cloud

> Monitoring](https://cloud.google.com/monitoring/?hl=en). Previously they would

Author: A shameful chapter best left forgotten 😆 

I left it out for brevity, as it is already quite long
